### Muscato (Multi-Genome Scalable Alignment Tool)

Muscato is a software tool for matching a collection of read sequences
into a collection of target sequences (e.g. gene sequences).  The
approach scales efficiently to hundreds of millions of reads and
target sequences.  A major goal of Muscato is to perform exhaustive
multi-mapping, meaning that each read is mapped to as many gene
sequences as possible, subject to specified match quality constraints.

__Installation__

Muscato is written in [Go](https://golang.org) and uses several of the
[Gnu core
utilities](http://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/coreutils.html).  It
should run on any Unix-like system on which the [Go
tool](https://golang.org/dl) and Gnu utilities are available.

In most cases, installation of Muscato should only require running the
following commands in the shell:

```
go get github.com/kshedden/muscato/...

go get github.com/kshedden/sztool/...
```

The executables for Muscato and its auxiliary scripts should appear in
your GOBIN directory (usually ${HOME}/go/bin if installed in a user
account).  You will need to add GOBIN to your PATH environment
variable when using Muscato.  If you are using the Bash shell enter
the following lines at the shell prompt, or add them to your .bashrc
file to make the changes permanent.

```
export GOPATH=${HOME}/go
export GOBIN=${GOPATH}/bin
export PATH=${GOBIN}:${PATH}
```

The easiest way to update Muscato is to run `rm -r` on your muscato
source directory (in go/src/github.com/kshedden), then reinstall as
above.

__Basic usage__

Before running Muscato, you should prepare a version of your target
sequence file using the `muscato_prep_targets` program.  If your
targets are in a fasta format file, you can simply run:

```
muscato_prep_targets genes.fasta
```

Instead of using a fasta input file, it is also possible to use a
plain text file with the format `id<tab>sequence<newline>` for each
target sequence.  The sequence should consist of the upper-case
characters A, T, G, and C.  Any other letters are replaced with 'X'.

The `muscato_prep_targets` script accepts a `-rev` flag in which
reverse complement target sequences are added to the database along
with the original sequences.

After building the target datafile, you can run muscato.  A basic
invocation is:

```
muscato --ReadFileName=reads.fastq --GeneFileName=genes.fasta.sz --GeneIdFileName=genes_ids.sz\
        --Windows=0,20 --WindowWidth=15
```

Note that the target files `genes.fasta.sz` and `genes_ids.sz` were
produced by the `muscato_prep_targets` script, run as shown above.

Many other command-line flags are available, run `muscato --help` for
more information.  The output of muscato --help is [here](http://github.com/kshedden/muscato/blob/master/help.md).

The results by default are written to a file named `results.txt`, a
tab delimited file with the following columns:

1. Read sequence

2. Matching subsequence of a target sequence

3. Position within the target where the read matches (counting from 0)

4. Number of mismatches

5. Target sequence identifier

6. Target sequence length

7. Number of copies of the read in the read pool

8. Read identifier

The tool also generates a fastq file containing all non-matching reads.

__Logging__

Several log files are written to the directory `muscato_logs/#####`,
where ##### is the same unique id used for the temporary files.
High-level logging messages are written to 'muscato.log'.  More
detailed logging information is written to logs specific to each
component of the tool, e.g. 'muscato_screen.log'.

__Temporary workspace__

Muscato uses a temporary directory for intermediate and logging files,
by default named `muscato_tmp/######`, where ###### is a unique id
generated by Muscato.  If NoCleanTmp is set to true, this directory is
automatically deleted after completion of the muscato run, otherwise
it is retained.  If retained, the temporary directory can be safely
deleted when desired.

__Testing__

There is currently a small collection of unit tests in the `tests`
directory.  To run the tests, enter the test directory and type:

```
go run test.go
```

Any errors will be printed to the terminal.  Detailed results of the
tests are written to the file `test.log`.

__Dependencies__

Muscato has the following dependencies.  The sztool package must me
installed manually with go get, as shown above.  All other
dependencies should be automatically installed by `go get` when
installing muscato.

[github.com/kshedden/sztool](http://github.com/kshedden/sztool)

[github.com/chmduquesne/rollinghash](http://github.com/chmduquesne/rollinghash)

[github.com/golang-collections/go-datastructures/bitarray](https://github.com/golang-collections/go-datastructures/tree/master/bitarray)

[github.com/golang/snappy](http://github.com/golang/snappy)

[github.com/willf/bloom](http://github.com/willf/bloom)

__Issues and feedback__

Please file an [issue](https://github.com/kshedden/muscato/issues) if
you encounter any difficulties.